

IT GOVERNANCE


Introduction
JAN  UARY 2018


Overview



Information security is one of the central concerns of the modern organisation. The volume and 
value of data used in everyday business increasingly informs how organisations operate and how 
successful they are. In order to protect this information —and to be seen to be protecting it — 
more and more companies are becoming  ISO 27003  certified.

The main drivers for security are undoubtedly globalisation, government  directives, regulatory  
requirements, terrorist activities and escalating cyber threats. Furthermore, organisations  
seeking contracts with governments or large corporate clients are increasingly  finding ISO 27001 
is a prerequisite  for doing business.
Certification is seen as a powerful assurance  of your commitment to meet your obligations to 
customers and business partners.

This situation is all the more pressing with the advent of the EU General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR), which requires businesses to secure the personal data of all EU residents, and 
hefty fines (up to 4% of plobal annual turnover or €20 million, whichever is the greater) can 
result from serious data breaches.
While the GDPR offers no specific guidance to ensure the protection of data, ISO 27001 offers a set 
of specifications that describe the features of an effective information security management system 
(ISMS).

We realise that pursuing the right certification for your organisation can be overwhelming, 
particularly because there are so many variations. These variations are sometimes renamed or 
superseded by newer standards, which can cause  some confusion. The purpose of this paper is to 
help you understand ISO 27001 certification and explore the benefits of following the information 
security rules set by governments.

•     What is ISO 27001? How does this standard help organisations more effectively manage their 
information security?

•     What is the relationship between ISO 27001 and ISO 27002?

•     What is the value of ISO 27001 certification?

•     How do these standards relate to ISO  9001?

•     What does someone need to know to initiate, or take on responsibility for, an organisational 
information security project — specifically one intended to lead to ISO 27001 certification?

This paper, written by ISO 27001 expert Alan Calder, answers these basic questions and more. It 
also points to online resources and tools that are useful to anyone tasked with leading an 
information security project. The information in this paper
is suitable for organisations of all sizes, in all sectors, anywhere in the world. More guidance 
and information is available from our ISO 27001 page.

IT GOVERNANCE                        JANUARY 2018


IT governance  and information security

The last few years have seen corporate governance requirements become increasingly more defined and 
specific. Information technology has become more pervasive — underpinning  and supporting almost 
every aspect of the organisation; manipulating and storing the information on which the 
organisation depends for its survival. The role of IT in corporate governance, in that case, has 
become more clearly defined, and IT governance is increasingly recognised as a specific area for 
board and corporate attention.

The information security standards

The ISO 27000 family of standards overs a set of specifications, codes of conduct and best-practice 
guidelines for organisations to ensure strong information security management. Of primary interest 
are ISO 27001 and ISO 27002.

ISO 27001 is a technology-neutral, vendor- neutral information security management standard, but it 
is not a guide. Of the above standards for IT security governance, ISO 27001 offers the 
specification: a prescription of the features of an effective information security management 
system.

As the specification, ISO 27001 states what is expected of an ISMS. This means that, in order to 
receive certification or to pass an audit, your ISMS must conform to these requirements.

While ISO 27001 offers the specification, ISO 27002 provides the code of conduct
— guidance and recommended best practices that can be used to enforce the specification. ISO 27002, 
then, is the source of guidance for the selection and implementation of an effective ISMS. In 
elect, ISO 27002 is the second part of ISO 27001.

These information security standards are the essential starting point for any organisation 
commencing an information security project. Anyone contemplating such a project should purchase and 
study copies of ISO 27001 and ISO 27002.

See the ‘IT Governance solutions’ section at the end of this paper for additional resources and 
materials.

Information security and the regulatory
environment

The two key reasons for the growing interest in certification to ISO 27001 are the proliferation of 
threats to information (‘cyber threats’) and the growing range of regulatory and statutory 
requirements that relate to information protection.

Information security threats are plobal in nature, and indiscriminately tarpet every organisation 
and individual who owns or uses (primarily) electronic information.
These threats are automated and loose on the Internet. Data is also exposed to many other dangers, 
such as acts of nature, external attack, and internal corruption and theft.

The last twenty years have seen the emergence of a growing body of legislation and regulation 
around information and data security. Some such regulations focus upon the protection of individual 
data, while others aim at corporate financial, operational and risk management systems.

A formal information security management system that provides guidance for the deployment of best 
practice is increasingly seen as a necessity in terms
of compliance, and certification is increasingly required of organisations (and governments) before 
they will be engaged in any significant commercial transactions.

International recognition

In the United Kingdom, accreditation  of certifying bodies is handled by the United Kingdom 
Accreditation Service (UKAS), which maintains a list of all organisations qualified to certify ISO 
27001. Through a number of agreements with other international bodies, a certification in the UK is 
recognised across the globe.

IT GOVERNANCE                          JANUARY 2018


The European Cooperation for Accreditation (EA) is comprised of 35 national accreditation bodies 
across Europe (including several associate members further afield). The EA multilateral agreement 
affirms:

•     The equivalence of the operation of the accreditation systems administered  by EA members; 
and
•     That the certificates and reports issued by organisations accredited by EA members are 
equally reliable.'

This means that certification approved by one member of the EA is accepted across all other member 
states.

ISO 27001 is not only recognised throughout the EU, but also has a broader appeal in other key 
markets via the International Accreditation Forum (IAF). The IAF ensures that ISO 27001 
certification is recognised across the world through a ’mutual recognition arrangement’,  agreed by 
more than 70 national accreditation bodies.

Market value of certification

In addition to protecting your data and complying with data handling laws like the GDPR, there is a 
distinct market value to ISO 27001 certification. It is financially prudent to protect your 
organisation's data and to meet the legal requirements of nations in which you seek to do business.

Achieving certification is a valuable and visible proof of your organisation's willingness to meet 
internationally accepted data security standards. Achieving this international standard is not 
simply marketing: as well as complying with the GDPR and other related laws such as those aligned 
with the Directive on Security of Network and Information Systems (NIS Directive), the ability to 
prove that your
organisation complies with ISO 27001 is likely to open business opportunities across the globe.

It should be noted that many markets have already shown a desire for ISO 27001 certification, with 
over 33,000 organisations worldwide having received certification.2

http://www.european-accreditation.org/benefits.
ISO Survey  201 d, https://www.iso.org/the-iso-survey.latin .

4


The argument for deploying a formal ISMS is fully developed in a short book called The Case for 
ISO27001.

Certification vs conformance

It is possible for an organisation to select controls and follow the guidance from ISO 27002 
because the good practice identified is universally applicable. Because it was not designed to be 
the basis of a certification scheme, however, it does not
specify the system requirements with which an ISMS must comply in order to qualify for 
certification.

Those specifications are contained in ISO 27001. In technical terms, this means that an 
organisation that is using ISO 27002 on its own can conform to the guidance of the code of 
practice, but it cannot get an outside body to verify that it is complying with a standard. An 
organisation that is using ISO 27001 and ISO 27002 in conjunction with one another can design an 
ISMS that is in line with the specification and follows the guidance of the code of practice and 
is, therefore, capable of achieving external certification.

In order to achieve internationally recognised certification, your ISMS must be audited by an 
organisation approved by the appropriate body associated with the EA and IAF (in the UK, this is 
UKAS). Furthermore, the auditing organisation cannot be your consultant — their whole involvement 
in your ISMS must be limited to their audit.

Certification and other management  standards

ISO 27001 is designed to be compatible with a number of other management system standards, such as 
ISO 9001 (quality management) and ISO 14001 (environmental management) that follow what is called 
Annex SL —a standardised structure for management system standards. The numbering systems and 
document management requirements are designed to be compatible, and thus enable organisations to 
develop management systems that inte  rate the requirements of each standard an organisation may be 
using. ISO 27001 +s also generally compatible

IT GOVERNANCE
JANUARY 2018                                                                                        
                                                                                               5



with ISO 31000 and ISO 20000.

Generally speaking, organisations should seek ISO 27001 certification from the certification body 
they currently use for certifying their ISO 9001 or other
management system. The experience of the organisation's quality manager in this process will be 
invaluable to the ISMS project.

There is no reason, however, why organisations shouldn't tackle ISO 27001 without having first 
implemented another form of management  system. In that case, they will choose a certification body 
on a commercial basis from among those available and operating in their country.

Most countries have their own accreditation services that maintain lists of the organisations that 
are accredited for ISMS certifications.

Information  security and technology

Most people think of information security as a technology issue. They think that anything to do 
with securing data or protecting computers from threats is something that onIy technological  
specialists — and specifically computer security professionals
— can deal with.

This could not be further from the truth.

It is the computer user who should decide which threats are to be protected from, and what 
trade-offs between security and flexibility he or she is prepared to accept. Yes, once these 
decisions have been made, the computer security expert should design and implement a technological  
solution that delivers these results — but they should operate according to the user‘s risk 
assessment.

In an organisational environment, those decisions should be made by the management team, not the IT 
team. An ISMS overtly and specifically recognises that decision-making responsibility should sit 
with the organisation's management, and that the ISMS should reflect their choices and provide 
evidence as to how effective the implementation has been.


As a result, it is not necessary for an ISMS project to be led by a technology expert. In fact, 
there are many circumstances  in which that could be counter-productive.
These projects are often led by quality managers, general managers, or other executives who are in 
a position to develop something that has an organisation- wide influence and importance.

Preparing for an ISMS project and the continual improvement cycle

An ISMS project can be a complex one. It is likely to encompass the entire organisation, and should 
involve everyone from management down to the post room. Implementation may well take many months 
or, in some cases, years.

ISO 27001:2013 offers a structured approach to developing the ISMS. The clauses describe the 
requirements of the ISMS, and Annex A provides controls that can be used to protect the 
organisation's information assets. There are no mandated stages to the project, but you need to 
apply a continual improvement  process from the outset; the PDCA cycle (see info box below) is one 
possible methodology.

The process, or an improvement to the process, should first be planned, then implemented and its 
performance measured. By comparing these measurements against the planned specification, you will 
be able to identify any deviations or potential improvements. These can then be reported to 
management for a decision regarding the correct action to take.

IT GOVERNANCE                           JANUARY 2018


Risk assessment and risk treatment plans

n ISMS must be designed within the context of and to meet the individual requirements of each 
organisation. Not only does every organisation have its own specific business model, objectives, 
unique selling features and culture, it also has its diñerent appetites for risk. In other words, 
something that one organisation sees as a threat that it must deflect, another mipht see as an 
opportunity that it should grasp.

Similarly, one organisation  may be less prepared to invest in defences against an identified risk 
than another.  For this and other reasons, every organisation  that implements  an ISMS must do so 
against the results of a risk assessment  whose methodology, findings and recommendations have been 
approved by the board of directors.

ISO 27001, in fact, requires a risk assessment to be carried out and, while it does not specify a 
methodology, it is very clear that this risk assessment must produce consistent, valid and 
comparable results, and analyse and assess the risks.

System documentation

he most time-consuming part of the entire project is the development  of the documentation that 
sets out how the ISMS works.


There are a number of different approaches to this, from using external consultants to tackling it 
yourself. The major argument in favour of doing it yourself (apart from avoiding, or reducing, 
consultancy costs) is that you will develop a much greater depth and awareness of ’how to do 
security’.  By developing  such expertise  and experience within the organisation, any further such 
projects can be dealt with more quickly and with a greater degree of confidence.

Without previous experience, development of all the documentation required can be a daunting task. 
The templates contained in the ISO/IEC 27001 Complete ISMS  T      it   ill save you hours of 
drafting and will help you to avoid trial and error dead ends.


peak to an expert

IT GOVERNANCE                          JANUARY 2018


Useful ISO 27001 resources


ISO 27001 bespoke consultancy

IT Governance has helped over 400 companies successfully implement an ISO 27001 ISMS. Drawing on 
our unique blend of practical information security know- how and proven management system 
consultancy expertise, our team will help you implement an
ISO 27001-compliant ISMS without the hassle, no matter where your business is located.

ISO 27001 Gap Analysis

A specialist, in-person review of your current information security posture against the 
requirements of ISO/IEC 27001:2013. Get the true picture of your ISO 27001 compliance gap, and 
receive expert advice on how to scope your project and establish your project resource 
requirements.

ISO 27001 Implementation Bundles

Four specially formulated combinations of best-selling tools and trusted resources helps you manage 
the ISMS implementation project from end to end.

ISO27001 Online FastTrackTM  Consultancy

A fixed-price online consultancy package designed to help small organisations reach ISO 27001 
certification readiness in just three months. Receive a 100% guarantee of certification.

7


ISO 27001 Internal Audit Service

Outsource your internal audit to a qualified auditor with deep experience of ISO 27001 and the 
audit process, and gain
the assurance you need to ensure you meet your clients' and stakeholders' demands. This service 
consists of two separate audit days spread over one year.



The Case for ISO 27001

This book is designed to provide a project manager with the arguments that may be necessary to get 
the organisation's board to make the appropriate commitment to the project.

Nine Steps to Success —  An ISO 27001 Implementation Overview

A thorough overview of the steps that are critical to success when implementing ISO 27001.



The official ISO/IEC standards

Reading and understanding the official ISO 27000 standards is an essential starting point for an 
ISO 27001 project.



ISO 27001 ISMS Documentation Toolkit

ISO 27001 certification requires organisations to prove their compliance with the Standard with 
appropriate documentation, which can run to thousands of papes for more complex businesses. With 
this toolkit, you will have all the direction and tools at hand to streamline your project.

IT GOVERNANCE GREEN PAPER | JANUARY 2018



Training courses

ISO 27001 Certified ISMS Foundation

Delegates who successfully complete this one-day introductory course will be awarded the ISO27001 
Certified ISMS Foundation (CIS F) qualification.

ISO 27001 Certified ISMS Lead lmplementer

This three-day course covers all the key steps involved in planning, implementing and maintaining 
an ISO 27001-compliant information security management system (ISMS). Gain an ISO27001 Certified 
ISMS Lead Implementer qualification.

ISO 27001 Certified ISMS Lead Auditor

This fully accredited course equips you with the skills to conduct second-party (supplier) and 
third-party (external and certification) audits. Build your career as a lead auditor, lead a team 
of auditors and achieve compliance with ISO 27001.

ISO 27005 Certified ISMS Risk Management

Learn the process of conducting an effective information security risk assessment through practical 
risk management methodologies as promoted by ISO 27005. Presented by an ISO 27001 practitioner 
offering real-world expertise and insights.

ISO 27001 Certified ISMS Internal Auditor

Developed by the UK's leading ISO 27001 consultancy company, this two-day course provides the 
knowledge and skills required to perform ISO 27001 internal audits that maintain compliance and 
drive continual improvement within your organisation's ISMS, in accordance with clause 9.2 of the 
Standard.
E-learning

Information  Security & ISO 27001 Staff Awareness E-learning Course

This e-learning course enables employees to gain a better understanding  of information security 
risks and compliance requirements in line with ISO 27001:2013, thereby reducing the organisation‘s 
exposure to security threats.

Software

vsRisk risk assessment tools

vsRisk software empowers the user to comply with the requirements of ISO 27001 :2013 and 
effectively conduct an information security risk assessment, apply controls, and produce 
audit-ready reports.

IT GOVERNANCE                            JANUARY 2018


IT Governance  solutions



IT Governance writes and publishes extensively on cyber security and IT governance, risk management 
 and compliance (GRC) subjects, and has developed a range of tools for IT governance, information 
security and regulatory compliance practitioners.

IT Governance is your one-stop shop for corporate and IT governance  information, books, tools, 
training and consultancy.  Our products and services are designed
to work harmoniously  together so you can benefit from them individually or use different elements 
to build something bigger and better.

Books
We sell sought-after  publications  covering all areas of corporate and IT governance. Our 
publishing team also manages a growing collection of titles that provide practical advice for stat 
taking part in IT governance  projects, suitable for all levels of knowledge, responsibility and 
experience.

Visit www.itgovernance.co.uk/shop/category/itgp-books to view our full catalogue.

Toolkits
Our unique documentation toolkits are designed to help organisations adapt quickly and adopt best 
practice using customisable template policies, procedures, forms and records.

Visit www.itgovernance.co.uk/integrated-management-systems to view and trial our toolkits.
Training
We offer training courses from stat awareness and foundation courses, through  to advanced 
programmes for IT practitioners and certified lead implementers and auditors.

Our training team organises and runs in-house and public training courses all year round, as well 
as Live Online and distance-learning courses, covering a growing number of IT governance topics.

Visit www.itgovernance.co.uk/training for more information.

Consultancy
We are an acknowledged  world leader in our field. Our experienced consultants, with multi-sector 
and multi-standard knowledge and experience, can help you accelerate your IT GRC projects.

Visit www.itgovernance.co.uk/consulting for more information.

Software
Our industry-leading software tools, developed with your needs and requirements  in mind, make 
information security risk management straightforward and affordable  for all, enabling 
organisations worldwide to be ISO 27001-compliant.

Visit www.itgovernance.co.uk/software for more information.



















United Kingdom


Unit 3, Clive Court, Bartholomew's Walk Cambridgeshire Business Park, Ely Cambs., CB7 4EA, United 
Kingdom
t:  +44 (0)333 800 7000
e:  servicecentre@itgovernance.co.uk
w:  www.itgovernance.co.uk


@lTGovernance
/t-governance
/ITGovernanceLtd




Europe
t:   00 800 48 484 484
e:  servicecentre@itgovernance.eu w: www.itgovernance.eu

@ITGovernainceEU

/it-governance-europe-ltd

/ITGovernanceEU
USA
t:  +1 877 317 3454
e:  servicecenter@itgoverlJanceusa.con w:  www.itgovernanceusa.com

@ITG  USA

/it-governance-usa-inc

/ITGovernanceUSA
Gulf
t:   +971 (0) 45 86 9178
e:  servicecentre@itgovernancegulf.com w:  www.itgovernanceguIf.com

@ITG_guIf

/it-governance-gulf

/ITGovernanceGuIf
Asia
t:   00 800 48 484 484
e:  servicecentre@itgovernance.asia w:  www.itgovernance.asia

@ITGAsia

/it-governance-asia-pacific

/ITGovernaiaceLtd




2003—2019 IT Governance Ltd | Acknowledgement of Copyrights | IT Governance Trademark Ownership 
Notification
